Key design philosophies of the Linux OS seem to revolve around giving the user as much freedom as possible. The cost is free, the command line is easily accessed, the programs are simple and modifiable. Rather than focusing on a simple and robust GUI, Linux operates under the assumption that the user knows what they are doing, for better or for worse.

Virtual Private Servers are essentially computers you've carved out of a (usually) a larger server, sort of like a plot of land to farm. You clear out a space and fill it with whatever you want. The capacity of the VPS is your acreage (how much information it's capable of storing and how quickly it can access that information when called). However, imagine this farm is actually inside of a BioDome. Nothing can get in or out without your permission. You can control every atmospheric element, and anything else that may affect how things grow. The benefit to this is that you can essentially play god inside of your little bubble. You can rain frogs, you can poison the ground water, you can raze the earth.. You can destroy your VPS (on purpose or by accident), without risking any harm to the computer you're actually touching to access it.

It's not a good idea to run programs through the root user because you're taking away your safety net. Even as a user who has root privileges, that's just one or two extra commands you have to put in to create the same destruction (safety net!). Also, hackers or malware have more to crack to do the same damage when you work from a user as opposed to root.